---
layout: post
title: "Day 10: Python"
subtitle: "Refactoring of Automated EDA App"
date: 2020-08-03 23:00:00 +0800
background: '/img/posts/ml.jpg'
---

## Refactoring edaMAME
I spent today's coding session on refactoring edaMAME using some principles I picked up from *The Pragmatic Programmer*. Here are some selected examples:

### Plot Configs
For every Plotly figure, I input the same configurations to:

* Remove the toolbar
* Remove the logo
* Specify the image download format, filename, and size

This was very repetitive. As such, I created a function that took as inputs the intended title, dataset title, and output height/width. This saved quite 10 lines x 13 plots = 130 lines of repetitive code.

```py
def fig_config(title, dataset_title, height=700, width=700):
    output = {
        'modeBarButtonsToRemove': modebar_remove,
        'displaylogo': False,
        'toImageButtonOptions': {
            'format': 'png', # one of png, svg, jpeg, webp
            'filename': 'edaMAME - ' + dataset_title + ' - ' + title,
            'height': height,
            'width': width,
            'scale': 1
        }
    }

    return output
```

### Feature Lists
edaMAME currently has several dropdown boxes for the user to choose numeric or categorical features. To obtain these lists, I used the data frame `feat_info` to select features based on their data format and measurement type:

* Pure numerics: Integers/floats that are **not** ordinal
* Mixed numerics: Integers/floats that **include** ordinals
* Pure categoricals: Strings/bools AND integers/floats that are ordinal

I found myself recreating these lists of numeric and categorical features each time there was a dropdown box. I figured that I would be creating more of these lists to use in functions that I'm going to develop. Hence, I moved the definition of these lists to the data upload page.

Now, when users upload their data, edaMAME does the computations for all tables and figures that involve unchanging lists of features. These are then saved as session variables from the start, and pulled into the various pages that require them.

```py
# Configure lists
pure_num_list = feat_info['Feature'][(feat_info['Data Format'].isin(['integer', 'float'])) & (~feat_info['Measurement Type'].str.contains('ordinal'))].reset_index(drop=True).to_list()

mixed_num_list = feat_info['Feature'][feat_info['Data Format'].isin(['integer', 'float'])].reset_index(drop=True).to_list()

pure_cat_list = feat_info['Feature'][(feat_info['Data Format'].isin(['string', 'bool'])) | (feat_info['Measurement Type'].str.contains('ordinal'))].reset_index(drop=True).to_list()

# Save as session variables
session_state.pure_num_list = pure_num_list
session_state.mixed_num_list = mixed_num_list
session_state.pure_cat_list = pure_cat_list
```

## Reflections on 365 Days of DS
Today is the 10th day of the initiative. I wanted to do this reflection a little earlier, but got consumed by the edaMAME project. Overall, it's been quite tiring trying to keep up the daily effort. But I've learned a lot:

* SQL
* Connecting to SQL in Python
* Streamlit
* Plotly

I've also refreshed myself on:

* Fundamentals of data: Formats vs. Measurement Types
* Statistics:
    * Tests of association between categorical features
    * Tests of similarity in means/medians across groups

I have to find ways to cope on days where I have less energy and focus, like doing activities where I'm mainly downloading instead of creating e.g. courses. Chiong ah!