---
layout: post
title: "Day 66: Excel VBA"
subtitle: "Automating Scheduling"
date: 2020-09-29 22:00:00 +0800
background: '/img/posts/automation.jpg'
---

Today, I continued work on the automated scheduling tool in Excel using VBA. I should have mentioned yesterday that this isn't actually data science, but a related field: optimisation. It would have been much more closely-linked had I chosen to work on an optimisation model, but oh well. Close enough, so I'll count it.

## New Feature: Mandated Rest
I added a new feature to the randomiser. This was the constraint that personnel were to have a mandated rest the following *working day*. If they did a shift on a Friday or Saturday, they had to take Monday off instead of the next day (Saturday and Sunday, respectively). To implement this, in addition to the existing checks on each cell in each row, I added another check:

1. If today is Saturday and the personnel did a shift yesterday (Friday): Block out today (Saturday), today + 1 (Sunday), and today + 2 (Monday).
2. If today is Sunday and the personnel did a shift yesterday (Saturday): Block out today (Sunday) and today + 1 (Monday).

If you're wondering why we're always checking for a duty in the past, it's because we process one row at a time, removing personnel from consideration in the random selection for a given day based on whether they did shifts the previous day.

Yes, it's pretty manual, and it might seem inefficient to have a nested for loop. However, the randomiser runs in about one second. I think that's acceptable.

## Re-optimised Feature
Initially, I used conditional formatting to display unavailable dates by default. This caused a huge lag in the Excel sheet, because it automatically ran for loops in the schedule table to check each personnel's availability on each date. That's 180 to 240 for loops: one per date per person. As such, I created a simple macro to show and hide unavailable dates by highlighting the cells in a different colour. The Excel sheet runs smoothly now.

## Upcoming Feature
Moving forward, I will need to implement new constraints on the mixing of personnel (COVID-19 split teams). I'm still working out how to do this manually. Given that there are several types of shifts to optimise, each with a different pool of personnel and have different levels of hierarchy, the optimisation might need to be sequential. We would need to randomise the shift with the most limited manpower, have the scheduler tweak that to his/her liking, then pass the results on to the next type of shift, do the same, and then pass the results on to the next type of shift, and so on.

However, like any responsible consultant, I will need to consult my "client" first.