---
layout: post
title: "Day 8: Python"
subtitle: "Building an Automated EDA Tool in Streamlit; Univariate Analysis"
date: 2020-08-02 21:00:00 +0800
background: '/img/posts/ml.jpg'
---

## About the Automated EDA Tool
I have to confess that the idea to build an automated EDA tool wasn't new. I first conceptualised the idea 3 months ago when I was reflecting on how I could improve my productivity in data science projects. I had already built up a bank of code through projects - some were published on [Data&Stuff](https://chrischow.github.io/dataandstuff/) but most were private.

When I experienced how easy it was to visualise data in Power BI and Qlik, and automate certain aspects of the ML process through the DataRobot course I mentioned earlier this week, I realised that this automated EDA tool idea was very doable. I could tailor it to suit my workflow and style of EDA. And so, I got off my ass and started experimenting with [Streamlit](https://www.streamlit.io/), an open source framework for developing apps from Python scripts.

Streamlit had been on my radar since last year. I think of it as the Python equivalent to [Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/), which I used when I programmed in R. I chose this to be my solution because (1) it's built on Python's Pandas library for data wrangling and works well with Python's data visualisation libraries like Plotly and Bokeh, (2) its apps are extremely lightweight and easy to develop, and (3) it's pretty.

## Progress
Yesterday, I continued work on the automated EDA tool, writing a function for data measurement types and merging that with the function to detect data formats (from Day 6). For ease of reference, I've decided to call the tool **edaMAME**, which stands for **Exploratory Data Analysis, Massively Automated for Me**.

Today, I created a simple interface for edaMAME. I wrote a simple function to display basic information about the dataset, implemented the code I wrote over the past two days for detecting data formats and measurement types, and added some graphs I typically use to analyse missingness. I also created some functions for exploring univariate data.

I took best practices for EDA from the book, [Experimental Design and Analysis](http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~hseltman/309/Book/Book.pdf) by Howard Seltman of Carnegie Mellon University. For exploring univariate data, Seltman advised the following:

For categorical data:

* Tabulate the frequency and proportions of each category
* Create bar plots to visualise the frequencies/proportions

For numeric data:

* Analyse central tendency, spread, skewness, and kurtosis
* Create histograms and boxplots to visually assess the above characteristics

Here's a video demo of the edaMAME platform so far:

<figure class="video_container">
  <video controls="true" allowfullscreen="true" width="700">
    <source src="/365DaysOfDS/img/posts/streamlit-edaMAME-2020-08-02-2008.webm.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
</figure>