---
layout: post
title: "Day 70: HTML/CSS/JS"
subtitle: "Static Webpage Development"
date: 2020-10-03 22:00:00 +0800
background: '/img/posts/webdev.jpg'
---

I was asked by a friend for help to create a static webpage for a corporate event. The webpage entailed graphs on mileage clocked (from cardio activities), and some other engagement features like digital badges and a photo gallery.

I took up the challenge and learned a few things about web development. I will be posting the learning lessons here. The code can be accessed [here](https://github.com/chrischow/gc50_trial).

## Tasks Completed
* Basic structure: lovely landing page panels
* Masthead with background image
* Event countdown timer
* Progress ring
* Chart.js bar charts with data labels
* Digital badge display
* Colour and font design

## Day 1 Lessons
* I finally discovered how landing pages are formatted so nicely. Each panel is simply a div that has a padding of `X rem` on the top and bottom. That gives each panel some nice whitespace.
* Defining `sections` helps a lot to sort out the code.
* The `_data` folder is able to store data files that the webpage can read from (for Jekyll at least).
* Some Liquid code does not work on GitHub pages! If you ever receive a page build error, it might be because of some Liquid functions that are supported locally, but not on GitHub.
* It's important to test your website on various screens. The Chrome Developer console has a neat feature where you can emulate different viewport sizes. The views I'd recommend testing on are:
    * Widescreen desktop
    * 0.5 x widescreen desktop
    * Large tablet + horizontal large tablet
    * Tablet + horizontal tablet
    * Mobile + horizontal mobile
* I implemented some third-party code to pull data from Google Sheets. By accessing a special webpage `https://repository.github.io/pull-data/?[lots_of_parameters]`, I could pull data from a sheet in a published Google Sheet into a YAML file in the `_data` folder. The website could then read the YAML file and populate graphs and web elements.

Figuring out the Google Sheets-to-GitHub integration took me a long time because the instructions were so bad. I might write a post with the instructions in future. Will continue with the project tomorrow.