---
layout: post
title: "Day 65: Excel VBA"
subtitle: "Automating Scheduling"
date: 2020-09-28 22:00:00 +0800
background: '/img/posts/automation.jpg'
---

Today, I was given the opportunity to develop a tool for automated scheduling. I'll share a little more about the problem definition.

## Full-Fledged Automation
Initially, I thought a full-fledge non-linear optimisation model would be useful. I did quick sketch of a solution that involved:

* Updating availability in a Google Sheets; and
* A notebook that ran an optimisation library in Python:
    * Reads data from a Google Sheet
    * Churns out the optimal schedule with respect to some criteria
    * Writes the optimal schedule to the Google Sheet

I conceptualised the problem as:

* Minimising cost as measured by the cumulative number of **total** duties and the cumulative number of **weekend** duties performed by each personnel...
* with respect to a set of binary variables representing the assignment of personnel *i* to shift *j*...
* subject to the constraints that:
    * Each shift must have exactly one personnel assigned
    * Each personnel may be assigned no more than *M* shifts per month
    * Each personnel may be assigned no more than *W* weekend shifts per month
    * Personnel may not perform back-to-back shifts

After creating a simple setup in Excel, I realised that using Python may not be feasible because (a) there are numerous optimal solutions, (b) the entire pipeline from Google Sheets to Python, and back to Google Sheets would take quite a while, and (c) the solution would still be subject to change anyway.

## The Good-Enough Solution
After speaking to the "client", we agreed that a simpler, approximate solution would work best. The tool would generate random schedules that meet some hard criteria, and the scheduler would need to adjust the schedules. The criteria would be **easily modifiable** for sustainability.

To assist the scheduler in adding the finishing touches, the tool would visualise availability and other planning parameters (e.g. weekends, which COVID-19 teams are assigned) by highlighting cells.

The broad approach was to (1) assign random numbers to each possible personnel-shift combination, (2) delete random numbers where not applicable (unavailable or did a shift the previous day), (3) assign the personnel with the higher random number value, and (4) clean up. The basic logic for the schedule randomiser:

1. In the schedule (date down the rows, personnel across the columns), assign random numbers to each cell.
2. Working down the table row by row. In each row:
    1. Check each cell if the relevant personnel is available on that date - availability is recorded in a different sheet using "from" and "to" dates.
        1. If unavailable on that date: Delete the random number.
        2. Else: No action required.
    2. Check if the relevant personnel performed a shift the previous day.
        1. If yes: Delete the random number.
        2. Else: No action required.
    3. Calculate the maximum of the random numbers in the row.
    4. For each cell:
        1. If the cell contains the maximum: Set value to 1.
        2. Else: Empty the cell.
    5. Move on to next row until complete.

This code takes about 1 second to run, and generates a random schedule. The planning sheet includes metrics of interest, like the total duties performed, and total weekend duties performed. It also indicates which days are weekends. This enables the planner to customise the randomised schedule directly in the sheet.

I'll install some other more complicated constraints tomorrow.